# hess-et-al-beta-escin-2019
Data, codes and analysis of the added buffer approach with beta-escin perforated patch.

A joint work by: Simon Hess (`simon.hess@uni-koeln.de`), Christophe Pouzat (`christophe.pouzat@parisdescartes.fr`), Lars Paeger (`lars.paeger@uni-koeln.de`) and Peter Kloppenburg (`peter.kloppenburg@uni-koeln.de`).

## Context
The data, codes and analysis contained in the present repository describe a proposed improvement of the "added buffer approach" introduced by E. Neher and G. J. Augustine in their 1992 paper [Calcium gradients and buffers in bovine chromaffin cells](https://physoc.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1113/jphysiol.1992.sp019127) (_J. Physiol_ **450 (1)** : 273-301). This experimental method is used to estimate the calcium [buffering capacity](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Buffer_solution#Buffer_capacity) defined in a way analogous to the pH buffering capacity of an acid-base solution. Roughly speaking, we are trying to answer the following question: When 100 calcium ions enter into the cell, how many remain actually free in the cytosol? Depending on the cell type (it is thought or argued that) most or nearly none will remain free. The reason why some at least won't remain free is the presence of _endogenous_ [buffering proteins](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Calcium_buffering) as well as sequestration in intracellular organels like mitochondria or endoplasmic reticulum.

The added buffer approach consists in introducing into the cell a "controlled" concentration of an _exogenous_ buffer that is also a calcium sensitive dye (a molecule whose absorption or emission properties are changing upon reversible binding of a calcium ion) like [Fura-2](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fura-2)--we therefore perform [calcium imaging](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Calcium_imaging) while disturbing the calcium dynamics of the cells we are measuring--. Then, assuming the validity of a calcium dynamics model, it is possible in principle to extract from a sequence of measurements (of decay times of [Ca^2+^] return to baseline after a stimulation) with increasing concentrations of exogenous buffer, the native or undisturbed calcium buffering capacity of the cell. The main contention point of the assumed calcium dynamics model is that the concentration of endogenous calcium-binding proteins is assumed constant; more than that, the whole [Ca^2+^] regulation machinery of the cell is assumed stable. This is contentious since the exogenous buffer is brought into the cell with the [whole-cell configuration](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Patch_clamp#Whole-cell_recording_or_whole-cell_patch) of the patch clamp method--that consists in attaching a glass capillary or pipette to the cell, to have the relative dimensions one can think of attaching the Eiffel tower to a car--which in known to perturb (to write the least) the intracellular medium and to let small mobile proteins (that can be calcium-binding proteins) leave the cell--to disappear in the pipette--. The "classical way" of avoiding strong intracellular perturbation is to use the [perforated patch](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Patch_clamp#Perforated_patch) configuration introduced by R. Horn and A. Marty in their 1988 paper [Muscarinic activation of ionic currents measured by a new whole-cell recording method](http://jgp.rupress.org/content/92/2/145.long) (_J. Gen. Physiol._ **92 (2)**: 145). But the usual perforating agents are not large enough to let the calcium indicators go into the cell. Up to now it was therefore impossible to combine the added buffer approach with perforated patch recordings. What is done in the present study is a combination of latter two techniques using [β-escin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deserpidine), a [saponin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Saponin), as the perforating agent. The companion paper describes this study and presents results showing that this perforating agent does great as far as preserving the cell integrity is concerned while letting our calcium indicator going in. 

This repository focuses on the calcium dynamics issue comparing recordings done using the usual whole-cell configuration with recordings using a β-escin based perforated patch configuration. In our manuscript we argue that the latter are far superior to the former. Here we give access to data and codes allowing anyone to check (and challenge) our claims.

## Content

This repository contains:

- `beta_ecsin_supp_C.xx` files where `xx` can be `org`, `html` or `pdf`. These documents (they have the same content in different formats) contain a [literate](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Literate_programming) description of the `C` code that was developed for this study. They are meant to be read (this does not imply that the reading is necessarily pleasant!). The algorithmic and numerical choices made are spelled out step by step. Test are regularly implemented, including memory leak tests using [Valgrind](http://valgrind.org/). The "tricky" computations are all done using functions from the [Gnu Scientific Library](http://www.gnu.org/software/gsl/). The code `aba_ratio` (the prefix stands for "added buffer approach") does the whole added buffer approach for a complete experiment--that includes a _loading curve_ and at least three transients--.
- Directory `data_paper` contains the experimental data in [HDF5](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hierarchical_Data_Format) format. The data are organized in sub-directories containing dopaminergic neuron recordings with β-escin (`data_beta_escin`), dopaminergic neuron recordings with whole-cell (`data_whole_cell`) and Purkinje cells with β-escin (`data_beta_escin_Purkinje`). The data organization within each HDF5 file is described in the `beta_ecsin_supp_C.xx` documents.
- Directory `code` contains the `C` source files together with the `Makefile` required to compile the code (for anyone wanting to replicate the analysis). The compilation is thoroughly described in the `beta_ecsin_supp_C.xx` documents.
- Directory `figs` contains the figures in `png` shown in the `beta_ecsin_supp_C.xx` documents. These last two directories can be created and populated automatically from the `beta_ecsin_supp_C.org` document.
- Directory `analysis` contains a document describing the `Python 3` code `systematic_analysis.xx` used for piloting the systematic and automatic analysis of all the experiments. It contains file `beta_wc_comp.html` that can be used for a quick overview of the analysis results with links to the detailed analysis of each individual experiment. Two `Python 3` scripts, `aba_boring.py` and `aba4comp.py` are included (they are doing the job of automatic analysis) as well as two sub-directories: `DA-beta` and `DA-wc` containing the full results (with figures) of each experiment analysis. The two `Python` script together with the two sub-directories and their contents can be automatically (re)generated with the `systematic_analysis.org` file.

